Amino acids: Chemicals that are the building blocks of proteins.  There are 20 amino acids, and they are linked together in different combinations to form different proteins.
Annotation: To comment on the finished genomic consensus sequence.  Specifically, the annotation of genome means identifying genes and determining their function; adding pertinent information such as gene coded for, amino acid sequence, or other commentary to the database entry of raw sequence of DNA bases.
Assembly: Putting sequenced fragments of DNA into their correct chromosomal positions.
Base: Also called nucleotides, bases are sub-units of the DNA molecules.  There are four bases in DNA:  adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C), and guanine (G).
Base Pair: Two bases that bond together to form one rung on the twisted ladder shape of DNA.  The base adenine (A) can pair only with thymine (T), and cytosine (C) can only pair with guanine (G).
Bioinformatics: The science of managing and analyzing biological data using advanced computing techniques.  Especially important in analyzing genomic research data.
Biotechnology: Refers to using living organisms or their components, such as enzymes, to make products that include wine, cheese, beer and medications.
Cell: The basic unit of any living organism that carries on the biochemical processes of life.   All plants and animals are composed of cells.  Groups of cells are called tissues, and groups of tissues are called organs.
Cell membrane: The “skin” that covers a cell.  The cell membrane acts like a security guard and checks what goes in and out of the cell.
Chromosomes: The rod-like structures in the cell’s nucleus that contain genes.  In prokaryotes, chromosomal DNA is often circular, and the entire genome is carried on one chromosome. Eukaryotic genomes consist of a number of chromosomes whose DNA is associated with different kinds of proteins.
Clone: An exact copy made of biological material such as a DNA segment (gene or other region), a whole cell or a complete organism.
Cloning: Making an exact copy of all the genetic material in a plant, animal or human.  Identical twins are technically clones because they have all the same genes because they form from the same egg, which splits into two separate embryos.  Scientists have found ways to artificially clone different organisms.
Consensus sequence: Average sequence of all the fragments.
Cytoplasm: The jelly-like inside of a cell within the barrier of the cell membrane.  All the smaller structures of a cell swim within the cytoplasm.
DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid): A molecule containing hereditary information that is passed to the next generation.
Double helix: The twisted-ladder shape that two linear strands of DNA assume when complementary nucleotides on opposing strands bond together.
Electrophoresis: One of the steps involved in DNA sequencing.  In this process, electricity is passed through a gel containing DNA fragments.  The smallest pieces more through the gel quicker than the longer pieces; fragments are ordered according to size.
Enzyme: A protein that can speed up certain chemical reactions in a cell.
Eukaryote: Any cell that has a nucleus.  Includes all organisms except viruses, bacteria and blue-green algae. 
Exon: The part of a gene that codes for a protein. 
Expressed sequence tags: The name that researcher J. Craig Venter gave to parts of genes that are “fished out” using a synthetic form of DNA called complementary DNA; a short strand of DNA that is a part of a cDNA molecule and can act as an identifier of a gene – used in locating and mapping genes.  Also known as ESTs.
Functional genomics: A new science that studies how genes and other sequences of DNA act in relation to the totality of DNA in an organism; the study of genes, their resulting proteins, and the role played by the proteins the body's biochemical processes. Genes: The basic units of heredity that are found in living cells; an ordered sequence of nucleotides located in a particular position on a particular chromosome that encodes a specific functional product (i.e., a protein or RNA molecule).  
Gene expression: The process by which a gene's coded information is read and translated into the proteins present and operating in the cell. Expressed genes include those that are transcribed into mRNA and then translated into protein and those that are transcribed into RNA but not translated into protein (e.g., transfer and ribosomal RNAs). 
Gene mapping: Determination of the relative positions of genes on a DNA molecule (chromosome or plasmid) and of the distance, in linkage units or physical units, between them. 
Gene prediction: Predictions of possible genes made by a computer program based on how well a stretch of DNA sequence matches known gene sequences 
Gene product: The biochemical material, either RNA or protein, resulting from expression of a gene. The amount of gene product is used to measure how active a gene is; abnormal amounts can be correlated with disease-causing alleles. 
Gene therapy: An experimental procedure aimed at replacing, manipulating, or supplementing nonfunctional or malfunctioning genes with healthy genes. 
Genetic code: The sequence of nucleotides, coded in triplets (codons) along the mRNA, which determines the sequence of amino acids in protein synthesis. A gene's DNA sequence can be used to predict the mRNA sequence, and the genetic code can in turn be used to predict the amino acid sequence. 
Genetics: The study of heredity.
Genome: The totality of all the DNA in an organism.  The human genome refers to all of the DNA found in humans.  Each type of plant and animal has its own genome.
Genomics: The study of genomes, including genome mapping and gene sequencing.
Germ cell: Sperm and egg cells and their precursors. Germ cells are haploid and have only one set of chromosomes (23 in all for humans), while all other cells have two copies (46 in all for humans). 
Germ line gene therapy: An experimental process of inserting genes into germ cells or fertilized eggs to cause a genetic change that can be passed on to offspring. May be used to alleviate effects associated with a genetic disease. 
Heredity: The way traits are passed from parents to their offspring.
Intron: A segment of a gene that does not code for a protein.
Junk DNA: Stretches of DNA that do not code for protein; most of the human and other eukaryotic organisms’ genomes consist of so-called junk DNA that may have regulatory and other functions. Also called non-coding DNA. 
Knockout: Deactivation of specific genes; used in laboratory organisms to study gene function. 
Library: Collection of fragments from a genome that are within plasmid vectors.
Messenger RNA (mRNA): RNA that serves as a template for protein synthesis. 
Microarray: Glass slide with several thousand genes of unknown function spotted on it; sets of miniaturized chemical reaction areas that may also be used to test DNA fragments, antibodies, or proteins.
Microbial genetics: The study of genes and gene function in bacteria, archaea, and other microorganisms. Often used in research in the fields of bioremediation, alternative energy, and disease prevention. 
Molecule: A group of two or more atoms that are bonded together.
Mutation: Any heritable change in DNA sequence. 
Nebulization: Mechanically breaking apart the genome of an organism under pressure.
Nucleotide: One of the building blocks of the DNA molecule.  The four nucleotides are A, C, T and G.  Because of their chemical structures, A can pair only with T and C can pair only with G.  These nucleotide pairs are known as base pairs.
Open reading frame (ORF): The sequence of DNA or RNA located between the start-code sequence (initiation codon) and the stop-code sequence (termination codon). 
PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction): Technique is used to produce millions of copies of a short sequence of DNA.
Pharmacogenomics: The study of the interaction of an individual's genetic makeup and response to a drug. 
Plasmid: A circular, double-stranded unit of DNA that replicates within a cell independently of the chromosomal DNA.  Plasmids are most often found in bacteria and are used in recombinant DNA research to transfer genes and other pieces of DNA between cells.
Plasmid vectors: A delivery system that is used to move the DNA fragments from the genome around throughout the sequencing process.
Polymerase: An enzyme that copies DNA.
Primer: A short sequence of As, Ts, Cs and Gs that starts the process of copying DNA.  Polymerase can’t do its job without a primer to begin or “primer” the process.
Privacy: In genetics, the right of people to restrict access to their genetic information. 
Prokaryote: The simplest type of cell, such as bacteria, which are one-celled life forms.  Prokaryotes don’t have a nucleus, which is the small body inside a eukaryotic cell that contains its genetic material.
Protein: Large molecules that are made up of smaller units called amino acids; the order is determined by the base sequence of nucleotides in the gene that codes for the protein. Proteins are required for the structure, function, and regulation of the body's cells, tissues, and organs; and each protein has unique functions. Examples are structural proteins, hormones, enzymes, and antibodies.
Proteome: Proteins expressed by a cell or organ at a particular time and under specific conditions. 
Proteomics: Study of proteins.  This new field of study would allow further analysis of genomic information and can be used in combination with genomic data to better understand genes and their functions.
Recombinant DNA technology: Procedure used to join together DNA segments in a cell-free system (an environment outside a cell or organism). Under appropriate conditions, a recombinant DNA molecule can enter a cell and replicate there, either autonomously or after it has become integrated into a cellular chromosome. 
RNA (Ribonucleic acid): A molecule found in the nucleus and cytoplasm of cells; it plays an important role in protein synthesis and other chemical activities of the cell. The structure of RNA is similar to that of DNA. There are several classes of RNA molecules, including messenger RNA, transfer RNA, ribosomal RNA, and other small RNAs, each serving a different purpose. 
Sequence: To sequence DNA means to figure out its specific order of As, Ts, Cs and Gs.  Automated DNA sequencing involves using fluorescent dyes to determine the specific order.
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP): DNA sequence variations that occur when a single nucleotide (A, T, C, or G) in the genome sequence is altered. 
Somatic Cell: Any cell in the body except gametes (eggs and sperm) and their precursors. 
Somatic cell gene therapy: Incorporating new genetic material into cells for therapeutic purposes. The new genetic material cannot be passed to offspring. 
Spacer DNA: Noncoding DNA in-between genes.
Transcriptome: The full complement of activated genes, mRNAs, or transcripts in a particular tissue at a particular time 
Transgenic: An experimentally produced organism in which DNA has been artificially introduced and incorporated into the organism's germ line. 
Translation: The process in which the genetic code carried by mRNA directs the synthesis of proteins from amino acids. 
Virus: A non-cellular biological entity that can reproduce only within a host cell. Viruses consist of nucleic acid covered by protein; some animal viruses are also surrounded by membrane. Inside the infected cell, the virus uses the synthetic capability of the host to produce progeny virus. 
Whole-genome shotgun sequencing: Method employed by both TIGR and the Venter Institute that involves breaking apart the entire genome and sequencing it piece by piece.
